Update repo read me for 2024 (#40)
ccao-data/model-condo-avm: README.Rmd

Reviewer: **issue:** Likewise, for this file: fix the line endings an re-request review.

| 2021    | City     | County-wide LightGBM model                  | R (Tidyverse / Tidymodels) | [Link](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-condo-avm/tree/2021-assessment-year)                                  |
| 2022    | North    | County-wide LightGBM model                  | R (Tidyverse / Tidymodels) | [Link](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-condo-avm/tree/2022-assessment-year)                                  |
| 2023    | South    | County-wide LightGBM model                  | R (Tidyverse / Tidymodels) | [Link](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-condo-avm/tree/2023-assessment-year)                                  |

> | 2024 | City | County-wide LightGBM model | R (Tidyverse / Tidymodels) | [Link](https://github.com/ccao-data/model-condo-avm/tree/2024-assessment-year) |

Reviewer: **nitpick:** Align your markdown table boundaries with the rest of the table please.

* [A description of the differences between the residential model and this (condominium)  model](#differences-compared-to-the-residential-model)
* [An outline of ongoing issues specific to condominium assessments](#ongoing-issues)

The repository itself contains the [code](./pipeline) for the Automated Valuation Model (AVM) used to generate initial assessed values for all condominium properties in Cook County. This system is effectively an advanced machine learning model (hereafter referred to as "the model"). It uses previous sales to generate estimated sale values (assessments) for all properties.

## Differences Compared to the Residential Model

> The Cook County Assessor's Office has begun to track a limited number of characteristics (building-level square footage and unit-level square footage, bedrooms, and bathrooms) for condominiums, but the data we have ***varies in both the characteristics available and their completeness*** between triads. Staffing limitations have forced the office to prioritizes smaller condo buildings less likely to have recent unit sales in certain parts of the county. Like most assessors nationwide, our office staff cannot enter buildings to observe property characteristics. For condos, this means we cannot observe amenities, quality, or any other interior characteristics which must instead be gathered from listings and a number of additional third-party sources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Cook County Assessor's Office has started to track a limited number of characteristics (building-level square footage, unit-level square footage, bedrooms, and bathrooms) for condominiums, but the data we have ***varies in both the characteristics available and their completeness*** between triads. Staffing limitations have forced the office to prioritize smaller condo buildings less likely to have recent unit sales in certain parts of the county. Like most assessors nationwide, our office staff cannot enter buildings to observe property characteristics. For condos, this means we cannot observe amenities, quality, or any other interior characteristics which must instead be gathered from listings and a number of additional third-party sources.
```

The only complete information our office currently has about individual condominium units is their age, location, sale date/price, and percentage of ownership. This makes modeling condos particularly challenging, as the number of usable features is quite small. Fortunately, condos have two qualities which make modeling a bit easier:

1. Condos are more homogeneous than single/multi-family properties, i.e. the range of potential condo sale prices is much narrower.
2. Condo are pre-grouped into clusters of like units (buildings), and units within the same building usually have similar sale prices.

We leverage these qualities to produce what we call ***strata***, a feature unique to the condo model. See [Condo Strata](#condo-strata) for more information about how strata is used and calculated.

### Features Used

> Because our individual condo unit characteristics are sparse and incomplete, we must rely on aggregate geospatial features, economic features, [strata](#condo-strata), and time of sale to determine condo assessed values. The features in the table below are the ones used in the 2023 assessment model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because our individual condo unit characteristics are sparse and incomplete, we primarily must rely on aggregate geospatial features, economic features, [strata](#condo-strata), and time of sale to determine condo assessed values. The features in the table below are the ones used in the 2023 assessment model.
```

library(glue)
library(jsonlite)
library(purrr)
library(tidyr)
library(yaml)

condo_params <- read_yaml("params.yaml")
condo_preds <- as_tibble(condo_params$model$predictor$all)

# Some values are derived in the model itself, so they are not documented
# in the dbt DAG and need to be documented here
# nolint start
hardcoded_descriptions <- tribble(
  ~"column", ~"description",
  "sale_year", "Sale year calculated as the number of years since 0 B.C.E",
  "sale_day",
  "Sale day calculated as the number of days since January 1st, 1997",
  "sale_quarter_of_year", "Character encoding of quarter of year (Q1 - Q4)",
  "sale_month_of_year", "Character encoding of month of year (Jan - Dec)",
  "sale_day_of_year", "Numeric encoding of day of year (1 - 365)",
  "sale_day_of_month", "Numeric encoding of day of month (1 - 31)",
  "sale_day_of_week", "Numeric encoding of day of week (1 - 7)",
  "sale_post_covid", "Indicator for whether sale occurred after COVID-19 was widely publicized (around March 15, 2020)",
  "strata_1",
  glue("Condominium Building Strata - {condo_params$input$strata$k_1} Levels"),
  "strata_2",
  glue("Condominium Building Strata - {condo_params$input$strata$k_2} Levels")

>   # nolint end
> )

Reviewer: ```suggestion
)
# nolint end
```

![](docs/figures/valuation_perc_owner.png)

> For what the office terms "nonlivable" spaces, i.e. parking spaces, storage space, and common area, the breakout of value works differently. See [this excel sheet](docs/spreadsheets/condo_nonlivable_demo.xlsx) for an interactive example of how nonlivable spaces are valued based on the total value of a building's livable space.

Reviewer: **nitpick:** Mega grammar nitpick:

```suggestion
For what the office terms "nonlivable" spaces, e.g. parking spaces, storage space, and common area, the breakout of value works differently. See [this excel sheet](docs/spreadsheets/condo_nonlivable_demo.xlsx) for an interactive example of how nonlivable spaces are valued based on the total value of a building's livable space.
```

Author: You know, I'm not entirely sure I agree with this since the list is exhaustive, not just some examples. But I'll change it to something else even cooler instead.

Percentage of ownership is the single most important feature in the condo model. It determines almost all intra-building differences in unit values.

> ### Multisales
> 
> The condo model is trained on a select number of "multisales" in addition to single-parcel sales. Multisales are sales that include more than one parcel and rarely reflect the market price the included parcels would fetch if they were sold individually. In the case of condominiums, however, many units are sold bundled with deeded parking spaces that are separate parcels and these two-parcel sales are highly reflective of the unit's actual market price. We split the total value of these two-parcel sales according to their relative percent of ownership before using them for training. For a \$100,000 sale of a unit (4% ownership) and a parking space (1% ownership), the sale would be adjusted to \$80,000:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Multi-sales

The condo model is trained on a select number of "multi-sales" in addition to single-parcel sales. Multi-sales are sales that include more than one parcel. In the case of condominiums, many units are sold bundled with deeded parking spaces that are separate parcels. These two-parcel sales are highly reflective of the unit's actual market price. We split the total value of these two-parcel sales according to their relative percent of ownership before using them for training. For a \$100,000 sale of a unit (4% ownership) and a parking space (1% ownership), the sale would be adjusted to \$80,000:
```
